feat: initial pass at State of the Budgie 2024/2025 (#8)
BuddiesOfBudgie/site: apps/site/src/content/blog/state-of-the-budgie-2024.mdx

I continued the development efforts related to layer shell support in the budgie panel code base. I spent a ton of time trying to get our existing `Budgie.Popover` code to work with layer shell, however as a result of _how_ we were positioning these faux popovers (which were their own GtkWindows), that wasn't a viable option. So I rewrote all of it to use GtkPopovers, which we could use under Wayland since Popovers did not have window constraints nor the seat issues we had under X11.

I did some easy hacks to quickly get a usable session going, such as: disabling budgie-wm (the one that'd extend Magpie v0 / Mutter) and preventing budgie-session from creating the "fail whale" dialog which would sit on top of all our other windows (including the panel).

### June

I fixed a wide range of issues such as:

- Raven being <del>dummy thicc</del> fullscreen
- Popover positioning depending on the panel position

![](/images/blog/2025/01/budgie-10-panel-position-with-popover.jpg)

> June 3rd marked the first full day of daily driving Budgie Desktop under Wayland. There was still some brokenness but the best way to get it all fixed quickly is to actively "dogfood" it!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
June 3rd marked the first full day of daily driving Budgie Desktop under Wayland. There was still some brokenness, but the best way to get it all fixed quickly is to actively "dogfood" it!
```

With a few fixes pending, we decided to release [Budgie 10.9.2](/blog/budgie-10-9-2-released).

### July

My previously mentioned PR landed at the beginning on July. This properly marked the starting point of Budgie Desktop being Wayland-only, as using Budgie Desktop `git` under X11 would effectively be broken due to all of the changes required for Wayland support.

Campbell [implemented fractional scaling support](https://github.com/BuddiesOfBudgie/magpie/commit/4375e717e648ef72eedc4f54c0fe0e7a11ee4780) in Magpie v1, improved handling of keyboard interactivity / focus, fixes for (sub-)surfaces, merged in his wlroots 0.18 work, and started implementing a new (currently) Budgie-specific [keyboard shortcuts Wayland protocol](https://github.com/BuddiesOfBudgie/magpie/commit/1317f60644f196d2dbf06b791e98339a082e5335).

Neal added a [labwc](https://labwc.github.io/) session to our Wayland sessions and we began actively dogfooding under labwc instead of KWin, as it supports all the wlr Wayland protocols we need.

> Surprisingly, IconTasklist _did_ work to some degree, despite this being the first time we ever tested it on a Wayland session that supported all the required protocols. Window grouping was busted however we were getting icons and apps would show up and get removed as they were opened and closed. So let's call it a draw?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Surprisingly, IconTasklist _did_ work to some degree, despite this being the first time we ever tested it on a Wayland session that supported all the required protocols. Window grouping was busted, however, we were getting icons, and apps would show up and get removed as they were opened and closed. So let's call it a draw?
```

David released [Magpie 0.9.4](https://github.com/BuddiesOfBudgie/magpie/releases/tag/v0.9.4) which resolved scaling issues when using a new gnome-settings-daemon (GNOME 47).

### October

David [submitted a pull request](https://github.com/BuddiesOfBudgie/budgie-desktop/pull/630) to update Budgie Desktop to libxfce4windowing 4.19.8. Took a bit of time for us to get around to reviewing it as most of us on the team had distro-related responsibilities or were attending events (Evan with some Solus stack updates, David with Ubuntu 24.10 and attending Ubuntu Summit, myself with Fedora 41).

Given all the bouncing between responsibilities and tasks, I didn't make much progress functionality-wise on budgie-daemon v2. I spent a considerable amount of time refactoring / actually organizing the codebase, implementing some display-oriented utilities to perform display changes, and started working on porting it off Meson and onto CMake + extra-cmake-modules.

### November

David <del>really cooked</del> did a lot of fantastic work in November. He submitted a couple pull requests that help considerably in the usability of our Wayland session, specifically:

> 1. [Session management](https://github.com/BuddiesOfBudgie/budgie-desktop/pull/638) changes that implement new DBus interfaces and moves some shims that were previously in budgie-wm into the v1 daemon. Our xsession is no more, being replaced with the Wayland session to launch using magpie-wm as the current default, with another session for labwc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. [Session management](https://github.com/BuddiesOfBudgie/budgie-desktop/pull/638) changes that implement new DBus interfaces, and moves some shims that were previously in budgie-wm into the v1 daemon. Our xsession is no more, being replaced with the Wayland session to launch using magpie-wm as the current default, with another session for labwc.
```

4. QtWayland / QtWaylandScanner support for more ergonomic and C++-native Wayland client code

No, this shouldn't signify anything to you besides "Qt was the right choice for this particular job" :P Get that idea out of your head, we're saying nothin'!

Anyways, I went through a mountain of work moving everything over to QObjects, [porting](https://joshuastrobl.com/todays-dev/4) to QtWayland generated code for zwlr protocols, working on new head configuration, leveraging Qt logging functions, and DBus server code. By the end of the month I had signals connected up and firing and began figuring out the next phase of display configuration with a new batch system.

![](/images/blog/2025/01/budgie-daemon-v2-qtdbus.jpg)

As a last bit of fun, I tested Budgie Desktop under [Miriway](https://github.com/Miriway/Miriway/) thanks to Neal putting a Miriway compositor session file in our internal sessions repo. Miriway doesn't support all the protocols we need but maybe one day it will and Budgie users will have yet another compositor they can choose from! The more the merrier.

![](/images/blog/2025/01/budgie-desktop-under-miriway.jpg)

### December

> The holidays weren't stopping us from at least getting some work done. The end of the year was nearing and we were trying to jam pack as much Wayland goodness as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The holidays weren't stopping us from at least getting some work done. The end of the year was nearing, and we were trying to jam pack as much Wayland goodness as possible.
```

> Evan [fixed window grouping](https://github.com/BuddiesOfBudgie/budgie-desktop/commit/8a25ad41a6f6dab205fe9d59150d7302597249b4) in the IconTasklist under Wayland. I lived with it for months but he couldn't tolerate it. Good on him honestly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Evan [fixed window grouping](https://github.com/BuddiesOfBudgie/budgie-desktop/commit/8a25ad41a6f6dab205fe9d59150d7302597249b4) in the IconTasklist under Wayland. I lived with it for months, but he couldn't tolerate it. Good on him honestly.
```

> David submitted a pull request that [implements a new settings bridge](https://github.com/BuddiesOfBudgie/budgie-desktop/pull/643) between some of our settings key, gnome-settings-daemon, and labwc. Some of us have been using a cobbled together labwc `rc.xml` file to have functioning keyboard shortcuts (like pressing Meta for Budgie Menu, Meta+A for Raven applet view, etc.) but this one-way bridge eliminates all that manual work! Some examples of aspects of the experience that get bridged:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
David submitted a pull request that [implements a new settings bridge](https://github.com/BuddiesOfBudgie/budgie-desktop/pull/643) between some of our settings key, gnome-settings-daemon, and labwc. Some of us have been using a cobbled together labwc `rc.xml` file to have functioning keyboard shortcuts (like pressing Meta for Budgie Menu, Meta+A for Raven applet view, etc.), but this one-way bridge eliminates all that manual work! Some examples of aspects of the experience that get bridged:
```

It is this sort of user experience that the system is intended to support.

With Evan and David now testing out the daemon, I spent some time squashing some bugs they identified. Still more to be done on that front related to built-in displays.

---

### 2024 In Retrospect

As you can see, there was a massive amount of work that happened over the course of 2024 towards our goal of moving to Wayland. As you may have noticed, we did not end up delivering Budgie 10.10 before end of year. As is the classic case of software development, some aspects of the experience have been proven to be trickier than anticipated, others requiring more work, some originally unscoped / undefined items needing to be worked on (labwc bridge as an example) to improve usability, and more.

If we put it all into perspective though, we accomplished the massive goal of Budgie Desktop being daily-drivable on Wayland for a typical end user usecase. You are able to:

- Log into a Budgie Desktop session on top of labwc from your login greeter of your choice

> - Launch applications and they're grouped as you would expect

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Launch applications with tasklist grouping as you would expect
```

- Open up Budgie Menu, Raven, various popovers and they are correctly positioned.
- Switch up your panel position.
- Assuming you have the wlr and gtk xdg-desktop-portals installed, share your screen in applications.
- Livestream using OBS Studio with screen capture working as expected

> - Once the labwc bridge PR lands, change many settings in Budgie Control Center and have them change the behavior of the compositor.

Reviewer: Some items end in a period, while others do not. It would be nice to have them consistent.

Author: Should be resolved in ed01480

---

## 2025

Similar to our epics for last year, this year's are centered around Budgie 10 and 11.

### First Epic: Ship Budgie 10.10

There are still some key areas that need improving or fixing before we can ship Budgie 10.10 to end users.

#### TODO

For items within the budgie-desktop repo itself, we have updated our [10.10 milestone](https://github.com/BuddiesOfBudgie/budgie-desktop/milestone/13) with the related items.

**Applets**

Some applets need to be updated to reach complete or some degree of feature parity with their usage under the "legacy" X11 environment.

- Keyboard Layout applet: This currently uses IBus and `Gnome.Languages` and needs to be updated so keyboard layout changing via the applet works.
- Night Light applet: This needs to be updated to leverage the [wlr gamma control protocol](https://wayland.app/protocols/wlr-gamma-control-unstable-v1). It will most likely do this by effectively being an indicator similar to gammastep-indicator, leveraging [gammastep](https://gitlab.com/chinstrap/gammastep) for starting / stopping gammastep and setting a specific temperature. Budgie Daemon v2 will eventually handle gamma setting for us.

> - Tasklist applet: Not to be confused with IconTasklist, this "legacy" tasklist provides a horizontal list of running apps, ungrouped, similar to `Wnck.Tasklist`. Evan has started rewriting this however some more work needs to be done on this front.

Reviewer: I actually didn't start Simple Tasklist, I just took over the work after the original person stopped.

Author: True

Author: Should be resolved in ed01480

#### Shipping

We are currently intent on shipping Budgie 10.10 within Q1 2025 (Jan-Mar), however as always we won't ship it unless we consider it ready (at least as ready as we can test). Budgie 10.10 will ship with the recommendation and default of using labwc, providing us more time to bake an excellent compositor that we can swap out at any time across Budgie 10 or 11!

It will be too late for Fedora 42 and Ubuntu 25.04, so the current plan is:

1. Ship it in Fedora rawhide once it is branched for Fedora 43 as well as have a COPR for Fedora 42. Budgie 10.10(.x) will ship in Fedora 43, with a self-contained change proposal planned to be submitted after the 10.10 release. While it won't be available immediately with Budgie 10.10, the plan is to also offer an ISO with the wayland session set up out-of-the-box too.
2. Ubuntu Budgie folks will provide an on-ramp in the form of a PPA for interested testers with the plan on shipping for Ubuntu 25.10.

> 3. Solus will have either a testing repo or make available eopkg downloads for testing. Since it is a rolling release, they have the luxury of being able to ship it whenever, so they will do it after would-be testers have put it through its paces and we have worked out any issues that'd be considered blockers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Solus will have either a testing repo, or otherwise make available eopkg downloads for testing. Since it is a rolling release, they have the luxury of being able to ship it whenever, so they will do it after would-be testers have put it through its paces and we have worked out any issues that'd be considered blockers.
```

We will provide more details once we release and have documentation on it as well.

#### Farewell, Budgie 10

With the release of Budgie 10.10, we will bid it farewell and move it to being in maintenance mode. We are committed to fixing Budgie 10 series at least until Budgie 11 is ready, so don't fret.

### Second Epic: Budgie 11

After the dust has settled with Budgie 10.10, we will shift our focus towards Budgie 11. While we have already been working on some aspects of the experience that will already apply to Budgie 11, we have not yet started on "budgie-desktop" itself such as: porting some daemon v1 functionality to v2, windowing logic, panel, Raven, etc.

> I could list out all of the items we would need to get to but...it is a desktop environment. It is kind of everything! Make no mistake, we will show it off as we work on it and when we have something that you can start messing with, we will have a way for you to do that too. We are not going to say what toolkit we are using, we would rather just _show_ you, or better yet you see it yourself on your own system. You can put two and two together though I am sure :)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I could list out all of the items we would need to get to but... it is a desktop environment. It is kind of everything! Make no mistake, we will show it off as we work on it and when we have something that you can start messing with, we will have a way for you to do that too. We are not going to say what toolkit we are using, we would rather just _show_ you, or better yet you see it yourself on your own system. You can put two and two together though I am sure. :)
```
